docs: rewrite SAML SSO guide and split into dedicated sub-pages (#7484)
elastic/docs-content: deploy-manage/users-roles/cluster-or-deployment-auth/saml-attribute-mapping.md

---
navigation_title: SAML attribute mapping
description: Understand how SAML attributes map to Elasticsearch user properties and metadata, and how to configure attribute mappings in your SAML realm.
applies_to:
  stack: all
products:
  - id: elasticsearch
---

> # Map SAML attributes to {{es}} user properties [saml-attributes-mapping]

Reviewer: can we contextualize this page in the context of the larger saml story? "For basic SAML realm configuration, refer to [main page]

Author: great catch

> When a user connects to {{kib}} through your Identity Provider, the Identity Provider will supply a SAML Assertion about the user. The assertion will contain an *Authentication Statement* indicating that the user has successfully authenticated to the IdP and one or more *Attribute Statements* that will include *Attributes* for the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user connects to {{kib}} through your Identity Provider, the Identity Provider supplies a SAML assertion about the user. The assertion contains an *Authentication Statement* indicating that the user has successfully authenticated to the IdP and one or more *Attribute Statements* that include *Attributes* for the user.
```

These attributes might include information like:

* The user's username
* The user's email address
* The user's groups or roles

Attributes in SAML are [usually](#saml-attribute-mapping-nameid) named using a URI such as `urn:oid:0.9.2342.19200300.100.1.1` or `http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/upn`, and have one or more values associated with them.

> These attribute identifiers vary between IdPs, and most IdPs offer ways to customize the URIs and their associated value.

Reviewer: maybe?
```suggestion
These attribute identifiers vary between IdPs, and most IdPs offer ways to customize the URIs and their associated values.
```

{{es}} does not require specific attribute URIs, but the values configured in the SAML realm must exactly match the identifiers sent by the IdP.

{{es}} uses these attributes to infer information about the user who has logged in, and they can be used for [role mapping](/deploy-manage/users-roles/cluster-or-deployment-auth/saml.md#saml-role-mapping).

## How attributes appear in user metadata [saml-user-metadata]

> By default users who authenticate through SAML will have some additional metadata fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, users who authenticate through SAML have some additional metadata fields.
```

* `saml_nameid` will be set to the value of the `NameID` element in the SAML authentication response
* `saml_nameid_format` will be set to the full URI of the NameID's `format` attribute
* Every SAML Attribute that is provided in the authentication response (regardless of whether it is mapped to an {{es}} user property), will be added as the metadata field `saml(name)` where "name" is the full URI name of the attribute. For example `saml(urn:oid:0.9.2342.19200300.100.1.3)`.

> * For every SAML Attribute that has a *friendlyName*, it will also be added as the metadata field `saml_friendlyName` where "name" is the friendly name of the attribute. For example `saml_mail`.

Reviewer: avoid future (assume this all predated your work)

```suggestion
* `saml_nameid` is set to the value of the `NameID` element in the SAML authentication response
* `saml_nameid_format` is set to the full URI of the NameID's `format` attribute
* Every SAML Attribute that is provided in the authentication response, regardless of whether it is mapped to an {{es}} user property, is added as the metadata field `saml(name)` where "name" is the full URI name of the attribute. For example, `saml(urn:oid:0.9.2342.19200300.100.1.3)`.
* For every SAML attribute that has a *friendlyName*, it is also added as the metadata field `saml_friendlyName` where "name" is the friendly name of the attribute. For example, `saml_mail`.
```

This behavior can be disabled by adding `populate_user_metadata: false` as a setting in the SAML realm.

## Map attributes

> In order for SAML attributes to be useful in {{es}}, {{es}} and the IdP need to have a common value for the names of the attributes. This is done manually, by configuring the IdP and the SAML realm to use the same URI name for each logical user attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For SAML attributes to be useful in {{es}}, {{es}} and the IdP need to have a common value for the names of the attributes. This is done manually, by configuring the IdP and the SAML realm to use the same URI name for each logical user attribute.
```

The recommended steps for configuring these SAML attributes are as follows:

1. Consult your IdP to see what user attributes it can provide. This varies greatly between providers, but you should be able to obtain a list from the documentation, or from your local admin.
2. Review the list of [user properties](#saml-es-user-properties) that {{es}} supports, and decide which of them are useful to you, and can be provided by your IdP. At a *minimum*, you must configure a mapping for the required `principal` user property.
3. Configure your IdP to "release" those attributes to your {{kib}} SAML service provider. This process varies by provider: some will provide a user interface for this, while others might require that you edit configuration files.

   Because {{es}} does not require that any specific URIs are used, you can use any URIs as recommended by the IdP or your local administrator.

> 4. Configure the SAML realm in {{es}} to associate the [{{es}} user properties](#saml-es-user-properties) to the URIs that you configured in your IdP. Refer to [Create a SAML realm](/deploy-manage/users-roles/cluster-or-deployment-auth/saml.md#saml-create-realm) for a sample configuration with `principal` and `groups`.

Reviewer: hmmm wonder if we should make this example a snippet 🤔

Author: yeah it's very useful but i think the main doc also has good directives on this regard, and if we convert it into a snippet we should change the main doc in a significant way now.

## Special attribute names [saml-attribute-mapping-nameid]

> In general, {{es}} expects that the configured value for an attribute will be a URI, such as `urn:oid:0.9.2342.19200300.100.1.1`. However, there are some additional names that can be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, {{es}} expects that the configured value for an attribute is a URI, such as `urn:oid:0.9.2342.19200300.100.1.1`. However, there are some additional names that can be used:
```

`nameid`
:   This uses the SAML `NameID` value (all leading and trailing whitespace removed) instead of a SAML attribute. SAML `NameID` elements are an optional, but frequently provided, field within a SAML Assertion that the IdP can use to identify the Subject of that Assertion. Sometimes the `NameID` will relate to the user's login identifier (username) within the IdP, but often they will be internally generated identifiers that have no obvious meaning outside of the IdP.

`nameid:persistent`

> :   This uses the SAML `NameID` value (all leading and trailing whitespace removed), but only if the NameID format is `urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:nameid-format:persistent`. A SAML `NameID` element has an optional `Format` attribute that indicates the semantics of the provided name. It is common for IdPs to be configured with "transient" NameIDs that present a new identifier for each session. Since it is rarely useful to use a transient NameID as part of an attribute mapping, the `nameid:persistent` attribute name can be used as a safety mechanism that will cause an error if you attempt to map from a `NameID` that does not have a persistent value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:   This uses the SAML `NameID` value (all leading and trailing whitespace removed), but only if the NameID format is `urn:oasis:names:tc:SAML:2.0:nameid-format:persistent`. A SAML `NameID` element has an optional `Format` attribute that indicates the semantics of the provided name. It is common for IdPs to be configured with "transient" NameIDs that present a new identifier for each session. Because it is rarely useful to use a transient NameID as part of an attribute mapping, the `nameid:persistent` attribute name can be used as a safety mechanism that will cause an error if you attempt to map from a `NameID` that does not have a persistent value.
```

:::{note}

> Identity Providers can be either statically configured to release a `NameID` with a specific format, or they can be configured to try to conform with the requirements of the SP. The SP declares its requirements as part of the Authentication Request, using an element which is called the `NameIDPolicy`. If this is needed, you can set the `nameid_format` setting in the SAML realm to request that the IdP releases a `NameID` with a specific format.

Reviewer: a link to the nameid_format docs in this context might be helpful

alt, overall, a link to the ref being like "for detailed information about these settings, refer to __" might be useful here because down the line it will have type info and info on whether a setting is static or dynamic etc

:::

*friendlyName*

> :   A SAML attribute can have a *friendlyName* in addition to its URI based name. For example the attribute with a name of `urn:oid:0.9.2342.19200300.100.1.1` might also have a friendlyName of `uid`. You can use these friendly names within an attribute mapping, but it is recommended that you use the URI based names, as friendlyNames are neither standardized nor mandatory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:   A SAML attribute can have a *friendlyName* in addition to its URI based name. For example, the attribute with a name of `urn:oid:0.9.2342.19200300.100.1.1` might also have a friendlyName of `uid`. You can use these friendly names within an attribute mapping, but it is recommended that you use the URI based names, as friendlyNames are neither standardized nor mandatory.
```

:   *(Recommended)* If you want to use your IdP's concept of groups or roles as the basis for a user's {{es}} privileges, you should map them with this attribute. The `groups` are passed directly to your [role mapping rules](/deploy-manage/users-roles/cluster-or-deployment-auth/saml.md#saml-role-mapping).

    :::{note}
    Some IdPs are configured to send the `groups` list as a single value, comma-separated string. To map this SAML attribute to the `attributes.groups` setting in the {{es}} realm, you can configure a string delimiter using the `attribute_delimiters.groups` setting.<br><br>For example, splitting the SAML attribute value `engineering,elasticsearch-admins,employees` on a delimiter value of `,` will result in `engineering`, `elasticsearch-admins`, and `employees` as the list of groups for the user.
    :::

`name`
:   *(Optional)* The user's full name. It will be used in {{kib}}'s profile page to display user details.

`mail`
:   *(Optional)* The user's email address. It will be used in {{kib}}'s profile page to display user details.

`dn`
:   *(Optional)* The user's X.500 *Distinguished Name*.

## Extract partial values from SAML attributes [saml-attribute-patterns]

> There are some occasions where the IdP's attribute can contain more information than you want to use within {{es}}. A common example of this is one where the IdP works exclusively with email addresses, but you want the user's `principal` to use the `local-name` part of the email address. For example if their email address was `james.wong@staff.example.com`, then you might want their principal to be `james.wong`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An IdP's attribute might contain more information than you want to use within {{es}}. A common example of this is one where the IdP works exclusively with email addresses, but you want the user's `principal` to use the `local-name` part of the email address. For example, if user's email address is `james.wong@staff.example.com`, then you might want their principal to be `james.wong`.
```

> This can be achieved using the `attribute_patterns` setting in the {{es}} realm, as demonstrated in the realm configuration below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can extract a partial value from an attribute using the `attribute_patterns` setting in the {{es}} realm, as demonstrated in the realm configuration below:
```

```yaml
xpack.security.authc.realms.saml.saml1:
  order: 2
  idp.metadata.path: saml/idp-metadata.xml
  idp.entity_id: "https://sso.example.com/"
  sp.entity_id:  "https://kibana.example.com/"
  sp.acs: "https://kibana.example.com/api/security/saml/callback"
  attributes.principal: "http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/ws/2005/05/identity/claims/emailaddress"
  attribute_patterns.principal: "^([^@]+)@staff\\.example\\.com$"
```

> In this case, the user's `principal` is mapped from an email attribute, but a regular expression is applied to the value before it is assigned to the user. If the regular expression matches, then the result of the first group is used as effective value. If the regular expression does not match then the attribute mapping fails.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the user's `principal` is mapped from an email attribute, but a regular expression is applied to the value before it is assigned to the user. If the regular expression matches, then the result of the first group is used as the effective value. If the regular expression does not match, then the attribute mapping fails.
```

> In this example, the email address must belong to the `staff.example.com` domain, and then the local-part (anything before the `@`) is used as the principal. Any users who try to login using a different email domain will fail because the regular expression will not match against their email address, so their principal attribute — which is mandatory — will not be populated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using this expression, the email address must belong to the `staff.example.com` domain, and then the local-part (anything before the `@`) is used as the principal. Any users who try to log in using a different email domain will fail because the regular expression will not match against their email address, so their principal attribute — which is mandatory — will not be populated.
```
